We were travelling around Iceland clockwise. We wanted to spend the
third night in Akureyri but all hotels and hostels were full. After
traveling another 50 kilometers north along the left side of the fjord
we found a room in a white two-story house with colorful runners on
the floor, creaky wooden stairs and a gaze canopy over the bed. In the
bathroom we found a white wooden chair with carved armrests. That was
pretty much how I imagined a house of a well-off aging woman whose
fiance ran away when she was young and she remained alone for the rest
of her life with broken but kind heart.{1} The town was called Dalvik.
Its population is almost fifteen hundred people which is a pretty good
number by Icelandic standards. Fishing boats were moored by a neat
dock. Thick aroma of fresh catch wafted down the town's streets. If
it's not too cloudy the snow tops of the low mountains around the
fjord were visible from everywhere. {2}

There is a ferry that goes from Dalvik to Grimsey island, the
northernmost populated part of Iceland. On some maps it's not visible
from under the Polar Circle line.{3}

We checked into the hotel that looked like an old woman's house around
nine and had a quick bite in the common kitchen shared with French
tourists who were traveling counterclockwise. In the room my wife
closed the curtains, crawled under the canopy and instantly fell
asleep. We had a brave plan to get up at six thirty and get everything
done. {4}

I couldn't fall asleep despite being quite tired. I tossed and turned
for half an hour while thinking about work and other problems and
finally got up, dressed, took the camera, and went for a walk around
the town. {5}

While I was climbing up toward the local church the fog came down from
the hill to meet me so I didn't have much chance for good pictures. I
wandered around the children's playground. Slides and stairs built out
of unfinished tree limbs looked like they were made by Baba Yaga's
personal carpenter.{6}

On the way back to the hotel I found that one of the two town's bars
was open. A sign saying "MEAT SOUP" under a picture of a sheep's head
stood on the sidewalk and smell of fried potatoes and quiet
rock-n-roll music wafted through the half-opened door. Bored barman
noticed me from behind the window and waved to me smiling.{7}

Passing this after wandering in the cold fog was beyond me.

I entered and asked for a cup of tea and small bowl of soup. The room
was small, but I noticed the woman in the corner only when she said
"Good Evening" right behind me. With a start I noisily turned around
together with my chair and greeted her too with apologies that I
didn't notice her earlier.{8}

"I was too set on the role of the only visitor...," I managed a guilty
smile.

"This is not your fault," said the woman with an eerie chuckle. "No
need for apologies".

She spoke English with Scandinavian accent but without sibilant
sounds, not Icelandic but rather Swedish or Norwegian. After years of
working in Scandinavia I recognize such accent after the first few
words. {9}

"Are you from Sweden?"

Confused by her chuckle I didn't find a better question.

"Almost," she said. "From Norway. Why? Do I look like a Swede?"

She straightened up and leaned against the wooden wall as if inviting
me to look at her. Judging by her dry, wind-burned face with beautiful
wrinkles she was 45. Or 55 if you'd trust her aged hands spread on the
table around the glass of red wine. Light hair was gathered in a
careless ponytail. Thin tendril missed the ponytail and hung down to
her chest over the Icelandic sweater with geometric pattern. {10}

"Well, maybe a bit," I mumbled, switching to Swedish. "I mean... I am
not myself.." "My name is Marit," she introduced herself in Norwegian.

I introduced myself and shook her hand raising from my chair. Then sat
down again turning half-way toward her.

"Would you keep me company?" she pointed to the free half of the
corner bench at her table. {11}

Her invitation did not sound very enthusiastically and frankly at that
moment I was more interested in soup rather than another random talk
with a stranger. But there was no way out of this and I moved over to
her table. For another ten minutes we exchanged platitudes about
Icelandic weather, hot pools, and I think about Grimsey island ferry.
Meanwhile the barman brought my soup, huge cup of tea for me and
another glass of wine for Marit. In another ten minutes I realised
that I already told Marit all the facts from my biography intended for
conversations with random people and she did not even mention when and
for how long she came to Iceland.{12}

At the same time I could swear that I asked her directly about that
and about her job and where she lives in Norway. And every time she
avoided the answer with amazing, almost hypnotic skill.

"Are you a politician by chance?" I asked directly.

"A politician?"

Marit looked at me confused for a few seconds. Then she laughed a
soft, bitter laughter.

"No," she stopped laughing and shook her head. "I am not a
politician."

I was quietly waiting. {13}

"I was a writer," she said finally. "I was a reporter. I was an
accountant, a teacher, a store clerk,...," She finished the list with
a Norwegian word I didn't recognize. "How interesting," I said.

Marit drank a large mouthful of wine. She shifted forward and looked
me in the eyes squinting as if she was trying to read a sign with
small print across the street.

"I was a human," she whispered.

The look in her eyes and her whisper made me uncomfortable. I glanced
at the barman. He was behind the bar messing around with his phone
[копался в телефоне] and twitching his chin with the
music. The music was merry country with Icelandic lyrics. {14}

"And now?" I asked.

"Now...," Marit took another drink of wine. Her eyes kept looking at
something inside my head. "Now I am neither this nor that. See for
yourself."

She startled me by getting up suddenly.

The barman looked up from his phone. Marit stopped at the counter,
paid with cash and left the bar saying her goodbyes loudly to the
barman and then to me. On the street she turned left and disappeared
around the corner. Dazed, I kept looking at the door closed behind her
for another fifteen seconds. {15}

When I looked back at the barman he already stuck his nose back into
the phone.

The only thing came to mind was that Marit is having a middle age
crisis or a little bit kuku. I finished my tea anticipating how I will
tell this story to my wife next morning. But when I was about to ask
for the check somebody insidiously whispered in Norwegian right next
to my ear: "Good evening". I startled with a jump. Marit sat on her
chair as if she never left. She was holding same glass of wine that
the barman didn't take away and looked at me with the same eerie smile
I've seen in the beginning of our conversation. {16}

"Good evening," I mumbled. "I did not notice you again at all."

The barman looked in my direction.

"Bag pardon?" he smiled.

"Errrr..."

"He does not see me," said Marit. "Look."

She got up again and went to the counter.

"Would you like the check?" asked the barman still talking to me. {17}

Marit stood literally three feet away from him. She was waving and
clapping her hands, whistled a couple of times and even sang a few
lines from a joyful Norwegian song. The barman didn't as much as
twitch. He didn't get any response from me, smiled again briefly and
indifferently and returned to his phone.

"Hi," said Marit looking at him. His head jumped like a tennis ball.

"Hello," he said forgetting to smile. "Did you forget something?" {18}

Marit explained that she forgot to finish her wine, order another one
and treat her Russian friend to a shot of Icelandic vodka. She pointed
to me with her thumb. I half-heartedly objected from our corner. I
still hoped to get up at six thirty in the morning, fresh and ready
for heroic deeds. And frankly, I did not need any more booze [?] after
Marit's tricks.

She bought me a vodka nevertheless and I sipped it - either out of
politeness or out of fear of the unknown that sat in front of me in
the form of Norwegian invisible woman, I wasn't sure. Her performance
at the counter could be explained by earlier collusion with the
barman, a stupid practical joke. But her appearance on the bench a
foot and a half away from me as if out of thin air... I looked at her
awaiting explanations.

And unfortunately I got them. {19}

## I realized instantly that this was not a human.

It's enough just to close my eyes. Then I can see Marit as if we met
yesterday.

She looks at me. Her wind-chapped lips move, her lids close and open
again, hair shakes slightly and her hands hug the wine glass. I hear
those typical raising intonations that make Swedes think that
Norwegians are always happy about something. I listen to the Freya's
story. Inadvertently [Невольно] I memorize every small detail
and my chest hurts and breath stops at times because I already know
that I will never be able to tell this story in my own language with
the only true words. {20}

But in random words forged into unimportant sentences it might sound
like this:

I was a writer, repeated Marit after long silence. My last name is
Hendriksen. I wrote two novels: one about a school teacher and the
other about an accountant in a large government agency. Printed a book
of short stories about everyday life in a retirement house. The
stories made me famous. In Norway the book sold as well as Stig
Larsson. It was translated into seven languages including Russian.
Critics' praises were almost obscene. [Критики
захвалили меня до неприличия]. {21}

After these stories I became part of the old joke about the writer
trapped by his own fame. Success tied my hands. My daughter was nine
at the time and I was dreaming about writing a book for children. A
real book, without cooing and playful lies. I wanted the book to be
read by grownups as well. So that grown up children returned to it and
found both worlds at once. A fair tale with brave heroes and happy
ending. And a sad Chekhov's reality where heroes and denouements have
no place. {22}

I tried scores of possible plots. There were thirty two beginnings
accumulated in my computer and I didn't like neither of them.
Everything looked too small, too cheap. Marit Hendriksen, the future
of Norwegian literature couldn't waste herself on such trifles.

More than two years passed like that. I kept working as a reporter and
my publisher finally recommended me to take a break. Write some
non-fiction. Some documentary. And maybe the true storyline will pop
up in my head on its own. I agreed and asked for a theme. She leafed
trough a fresh issue of Morgenbladet on her table, put her finger on a
picture of Icelanders with posters in front of the alting building and
said "Iceland. Life after bankruptcy." {23}

In a few weeks, at the end of May I arrived to Reykjavik. I stayed
there till September and did write a two hundred pages report about
small but strong country almost bankrupted by a group of bankers lost
in their games. It came out touching and striking and the first
careful print run had to be extended (replenished?) twice
[первый осторожный тираж пришлось
допечатывать дважды].

But that does not matter now. Whole year after returning to Oslo I was
just finishing what's left from my old life. I felt like I was
watching selected episodes of a thriller that had just ended. Titles
are over, you know how it ends, see the holes in the plot line with
the hind sight and no meaning is left in the actor's play. {24}

I was switched in the middle of my Iceland's summer. On June twenty
eighth. On that day I reached the village where my mother's side
grandfather was born. It is on the eastern shore of the next fjord.
Over there, behind the mountains. My grandfather was born in a
fisherman's family but he loved various mechanisms since early
childhood. When he was twelve he fixed a watch of a visiting priest
from Sigljufjordur. The priest broke them when he fell from his horse
and abandoned them right there. When the grandfather was seventeen
local fishermen co-op rented the first motorized schooner. The motor
broke right away. While the co-op was arranging for an engineer to
come from Akureyri grandfather sneaked to the schooner one night and
secretly fixed everything. Ultimately the co-op gathered some money
and sent him to study in the University of Copenhagen. {25}

The village waited long for the return it it's first learned son. The
grandfather met my grandmother in Copenhagen. They married and moved
to Bergen just before the war.After liberation the grandfather took
Norwegian citizenship. He never returned to Iceland.

My mother was never interested much in her Icelandic relatives. Out of
two hundreds of village inhabitants at least a quarter were our direct
relatives one way or another, but I didn't know anybody there. I got a
room at the only hotel in the village. I wasn't even sure if I should
talk about my ancestors with the local people. After all, the
grandfather cheated on the whole village. It's doubtful that he's
remembered well. {26}

I planned to do some work after dinner that I shared with an American
family. They also came here to gawk at the land of their ancestors. I
wrote a couple of paragraphs, but the words were not coming. The head
was resoundingly empty. Not because I was tired but rather in
expectation of news that will make you to re-write everything anew
anyways.

From my second storey room I could see the brook cutting through the
village. Even here in the village wisps of fog hung over the water.
Further toward the foothills the brook was completely covered by fog's
matte blanket, but the hilltops were still glowing in the last light
of the sunset. There was a building on one of the hilltops that looked
like a lighthouse. I closed the laptop, dressed and went to look at
it. {27}

I had rubber boots on my feet and I walked toward the hills along the
brook hoping to get out of the fog sooner of later. In places the
sores were too rocky and I walked right in the water. The brook was
very shallow.

The fog thickened. Soon the visibility was reduced to twenty feet or
so. As usual in such cases, I felt that the world shrunk and was
empty, there were neither village nor mountains nor sky but only me
and the endless brook wiggling between grass and rocks. {28}

The climb didn't steepened, but the shores were growing and becoming
more and more steep. I realized that most probably the brook flowed
out of the gorge and wouldn't lead me out of the fog, but rather away
from the hill which I wanted to climb. I stopped in doubt. The hill
with the mysterious building should be on the left, but I was afraid
of climbing the steep slope of the gorge in this thick fog. On the
other hand I was pretty sure that a hundred feet up the slope the fog
would end and the slope itself become less steep.

When I finally decided and mage the first step towards the left shore
somebody called me. {29}

Startled, I nearly lost my balance. The call repeated clearer and
louder. Somebody upstream was saying "Good Evening" in Icelandic. I
replied "Good Evening" peering in vane into the whitish twilight. I
made few steps in the direction of the voice expecting to see a
standing up person in the fog. Then I lowered my eyes and screamed.

Somebody who wished me good evening was laying in the water face up
almost barring the brook. I realized instantly that this was not a
human - by protruding, spherical eyes. They looked more like monkey's
eyes, but were bigger, much bigger. The face itself didn't remind a
monkey, it was a human's face, but not a grown up human. It had
proportions of a child's face. {30}

Imagine a face of a three years old child, snub-nosed[?] middle
eastern boy. Make it two times bigger, add huge plum-like eyes, many
days stubble on the cheeks, chin, upper lip, add coarse dark wool
instead of hair, imagine childish ears sticking out of that wool and
covered by brownish fuzz. Put all this on a thick neck, also covered
with fuzz. The creature that called me looked exactly like that. {31}

I would have been scared to death unless the body bearing this head
was dressed into some crazy rugs. The first thing I noticed was a
woolen grey skirt with lace trim, way too large. Under the skirt I
noticed woman's pantaloons with some decorations on the calves. A
colorful striped sock was on one foot, remnants of a coarse fishnet
stocking on the other. The body was dressed into a pink velour jacket
that was unbuttoned and wobbling in the running water of the brook.
Under the jacket there was a touristy t-shirt with a sign in
Icelandic: "I have no idea what this t-shirt says." {32}

"Help me," said the creature.

The voice pitch was high, but not childish. Rather feminine. Clear,
steady voice of a grown up woman. I stood with my jaw dropped and
looked into the round eyes that disappeared under the huge smooth lids
at regular intervals. Thick eyelashes were curling up along the edge
of the lids.

"Help me," repeated the creature. {33}

It said two more short sentences which were beyond my knowledge of
Icelandic. Automatically I asked if it speaks English and felt like an
idiot. How can THIS speak English? Icelandic is fine, it is an
official language of elves, trolls and other folklore creatures, but
English...

"I am inshurret," answered the creature with rolling accent. "I got
srrrown off the hilll. I sink I brrroke my spine. Hellllp me." {34}

Only then I noticed that one arm of the creature is twisted
unnaturally and a thin stream of blood runs into the brook from under
its head. I stepped closer yet. Of course I wanted to help but I had
no idea what to do with a broken spine. Touch nothing, call 911, sit
and wait for the paramedics? What other help could I provide?

Feeling like an idiot again I pulled out the phone and offered to call
a doctor.

"No," said the creature. "Shust drrrag me upstrrream." {35}

After some hesitation I decided to object. I said that in its
condition this method of transporting it is suicidal. Added that I am
not sure I am strong enough to carry it any significant distance.

"I an verrry lllight. You can easssily carrry me. I willl not die on
you, I prrromise. I am not frrrail. Not lllike you humans."

I nodded and said that I have no doubts in his non-human nature. That
I readily believe into his super-human endurance. I offered to run and
find some of his non-human relatives and ask them to help. {35}

"If you helllp me, I willl grrrant you a wish," the creature
interrupted me. "Yourrr biggest wish. Yourrr storrry."

"My story?" asked I.

I didn't realise right away what it means. I first thought about my
documentary. I was not surprised any more that this big-eyed monster
in an Icelandic stream was aware about my work. It probably proposes
me to describe this episode, I thought. Introduce some magic realism
contrasts into reporting.

"Yourrr storrry", the creature repeated. "For shillldrrren." {36}

When it was saying "for children" its fuzzy ears moved - first up and
down and then in circle, dog-like. I couldn't read any emotions on its
face, but this ears movement suddenly looked like a sign of serious
intentions. As if the creature was trying to reassure me that it's not
mocking me but offering an honest deal.

I didn't even ask about details. I squatted letting icy water into my
boots and grabbed the fuzzy wrists sticking out of wet velour sleeves.
It's fingers were thin and gnarly, almost without fuzz. Five quite
human fingers, the only difference being the index finger was not as
close to the rest of them as in humans. It grew from a separate base
that was roughly same distance from the thumb and the ring finger.
{37}

The creature did not lie. It was very light, even with all the wet
clothes it was hardly heavier than a ten years old child. I easily
lifted it on my back and stood up crossing its hands on my chest. It's
cheek, surprisingly hot under the wet stubble pressed against my
temple. I heard its breath - even and slow and felt thick musky smell.
I cannot say the smell was unpleasant - just pungent. It reminded
smell of wet horse hair with slight skunk undertones. {38}

I carried it upstream through the fog carefully sloshing[?] along the
middle of the brook bed. The clothes on my back got wet instantly and
for the first few minutes I was shivering, but the work of carrying my
load made me sweat very soon. Carrying a ten years old child is hard
work too, especially if the child is taller than you and its feet drag
and catch on the rocks. Especially if it is not a child but a live
troll from Elder Edda.

My forehead was sweating. The cheek of my load was burning my temple.

And then, as if wishing to distract me from my labors the creature
started to talk. {39}

## They are born right under the sky.

"What do you know about Icelandic horses?" it asked. "Icelandic
horses?" I nearly stumbled over a rock sticking out of the water.

The fog got noticeably darker. There was still more than two hours
till the full July twilight, but the gorge grew narrower. Brook's
shores were going steep uphill within a couple of steps from the
shores. {40}

"The are... Icelandic..," I stumbled along remembering herds of little
horses with fluffy manes along the circular road. "Little and cute. My
daughter wanted a horse like that. Three of her class mates are very
dedicated riders. They gave her a bunch of those Swedish books...
About girls and horses. She was whining for half a year: "Mom, daddy
says you are famous now, have money to spend, let's buy a horse." I
said "Why wouldn't you learn to stay up in a saddle first?" Signed her
up to some riding courses. She went there for three months and got
tired of it. {41}

"That's good," The voice of my burden suddenly dropped by octave and
sounded almost eerie. "That's good that she got tired soon."

"Yes," agreed I, not being sure with what.

"They are born right under the sky," the creature said in its normal
voice. "This is the first thing you need to know. Here, near
Skagafjord in Trollaskagi valleys they are born right under the sky.
In spring when the snow begins to melt around the mountain foothills
people open winter stables. The horses walk out toward freedom. Mares
give birth on the young grass early in the morning twilight when the
sun is still raising over the glacier. {42}

The wind dies. The herd surrounds the mother to be. It waits for the
foal to appear. Horses keep the distance from the mare and stand still
and only occasionally they shake their manes, shift from foot to foot
and snort if the delivery does not go well. When the umbilical cord
breaks the mother turns around and lowers her head over the newborn.
She looks at it and sniffs it for long time and neighs tiredly if
everything is in order. Then everybody lowers their heads as well. In
a couple of minutes the herd scatters not paying attention to people
who rode in to look at and estimate their new property.{43}

An hour passes. The foal tries to get up few times and few times his
legs fail him. Finally he succeeds. He stands for a while not sure
what to do next. He raises his head and sees something dark and big.
This is his mother. Some smaller blobs shake nearby. These are the
people that are judging him. The mother waits patiently. The people
look at each other, talk, laugh while inventing him a name and
predicting his future, but he does not know yet how much in his life
depends on these creatures. He cannot even see them well and he turns
away. {44}

The sun is blazing over the glacier. The ice shines, the snow caps on
the mountains shine above it, the deep spring sky shines too and the
foal is blinking and squinting while his eyes get used to the bright
light. His brain cannot yet recognise contours and colors, he is still
learning to see this world in details and it seems to him that he
stands under an enormous shining dome. He is not afraid. From this
moment on he knows that the world should be endless, it should be
filled with the smells of grass and horse, it should murmur with
snow-melt water in the stream and shake under his feet from the hooves
of young colts fighting playfully with each other.{45}

The foal makes his first steps. Finds mothers udder and starts to suck
her milk.

The people are satisfied. They walk away, mount their horses and ride
home not thinking about the foal anymore. They gave him a name and
decided what to do with him in four years when the time comes to train
him. They predicted how even his [toelt] will be. They estimated for
how much money they can sell him to some visiting buyers. People like
to know future of other creatures.

This is how the horses are born by Skagafjord in Trollaskagi valleys.
This is how chestnut Freya with white mark was born. {46}

## Complete Mess

"What do you know about the hidden folk?" asked the creature
interrupting its story. I cannot remember now what language it used to
tell Freya's story. I remember that I understood everything perfectly
as if I was talking to my best friend or even my daughter, but cannot
tell at all what words have been said. It seems that there were
neither English nor Norwegian nor Icelandic words there. No words at
all that I know. And nevertheless I would bet that when the creature
was talking about the hidden folk it used an Icelandic word:
Huldufólk. {47}

"The other day in Oulafsfjordur,.." I stopped briefly to adjust my
burden that was sliding to one side, "Bag pardon. So, the other day in
Oulafsfjordur I talked to the town council... There was an elder man,
way over seventy, with huge white beard, shaggy grey hair... He was
trying to convince me that the financial crisis is revenge of the
hidden folk for developing areas of their traditional compact
settlement [компактного проживания]. He was
saying that we should stop building roads for tourists everywhere and
drill ten kilometer tunnels... I was listening and laughing to myself.
What a mess some of those Icelanders have in their heads. {48}

"Complete mess," agreed the creature. But it is not their fault. How
would they know what we really are?

"So the development does not bother you?" asked with my voice the
reporter Marit Hendriksen recovering from shock.

"Inevitable does not bother us," denied the creature flatly. "People
are part of this world. They live the way they can. They are changing
and suffering. We do not live. We look and listen. The one who is not
changing and suffering has only the right to look and listen and step
aside when the time comes. This is the first thing you need to know
about the hidden folk.{49}

## We will be together for life.

"When the chestnut horse with the white mark has been born," continued
the creature, "The owner of the herd came with his daughter, lively
girl of fourteen. Her name was Katla. She was riding from early
childhood and learned about horses as much as a human can learn. Now,
at the end for the childhood she wanted to learn about everything else
and especially about the stars that twinkled above the glacier in the
night and about the dark abyss between them. That winter she begged
her parents to buy her an amateur telescope for birthday. She has
visited web sites of all large observatories and realized already that
at some point she will leave for Reykjavik and then further - to US,
Europe or even to Chile - to the largest telescopes on Earth. But that
was still in the future. {50}

While her father was caressing the neck of the mare that just gave
birth Katla squatted and checked the newborn foal. She told her father
that the everything is fine. The foal will soon be able to control its
legs and go to look for his mom's belly, but her own slanted
[кривое] belly does not predict any racing victories. The father
nodded. He could see himself that the little chestnut will grow too
short, too asymmetrical, with too big a head and mane, too uneven in
tölt. Even the white mark on her muzzle [морде] above the nose
looked smudged. Instead of a noble mark it looked like a poorly
slapped on band-aid.

"We'll never be able to get rid of this ugly duckling
[дурнушки]," said the farther. "Call her any way you like."

Katla shook her head. {51}

"I will call her Freya. Nobody can be an ugly duckling with such a
name. She will be beautiful and fearless, like the goddess. It's fine
if nobody will buy her. She will be my horse. We will be together for
life. Am I right, Freya?"

She squatted again and the foal felt a light touch on his head. She
didn't know what or who it was, but suddenly she felt even stronger
urge to stand up. She gathered her strength and pushed up, got off the
ground finally and stood on her shaking legs. Formless sounds were
coming from somewhere on the side and from above. The dark shape of
her mother was looming in front. Above her head, above all the forms
and sounds the sunny universe was blazing bright. {52}

As soon as the foal started to suck her mother people left. They had
many other horses and many other things to do.

The hidden folk came to look at the newborn in the evening before the
sunset. They come every time when a chestnut filly with a white mark
is born by the Skagafjord in Trollaskagi valleys. {53}

## Everything is different.

"Many people believe that animals can sense us," said the creature
after a pause. "When sheep on an empty slope start to worry
[приходят в беспокойство], or a dog barks
endlessly on a lonely trail people say that the hidden folk is
somewhere around. That is nonsense [чепуха]. Animals are also
part of this world. They are changing and suffering. Just like people
they don't notice us until they are called [окликнули]. And
even when they are called they do not see us. Like people they see a
creature of their imagination. Random. Foolish [Несуразную].
Pitiful." {54}

I remember how at these words I glanced at the fuzzy arms I was
holding and felt that I was blushing. I wondered if this bug-eyed
monster in pantaloons was all my imagination was capable of. Couldn't
my brain create something more decent.

"But how... How do you really look?" I asked.

"We do not look. How does the moon look when nobody looks at it?"

This question sounded familiar. Somebody asked me this question
before. Or asked it in my presence. For a few seconds I was trying to
remember where it was. In Copenhagen when I was visiting my publisher?
On some random TV channel in a hotel room? At the philosophy seminar
twenty years ago? {55}

"It doesn't," answered I not remembering where it was. "The world that
has no spectators does not look. It just is. But,.." I shook my head
and the hot stubble of my burden scratched my temple. "But it applies
to everybody, not just you."

"Here on Earth only we have no spectators. Nobody's eyes catch us
unguarded. When a man passes or a fox runs by and you see them your
brain paints in its own colors. But it draws on an existing canvas,
over somebody else's sketch. It traces, colors and hatches?
[штрихует] that which is outside. When the hidden folk calls
you it's very different. Your look bounces back as if from a mirror.
You are coloring that which is inside yourself. " {56}

Suddenly the gorge and the brook turned left. I didn't notice the turn
right away and walking out of the water nearly bumped into a stone
wall covered with scattered clumps of moss. The slope became nearly
vertical. I looked up. The blurred band of the sky pushed back even
further. I was carrying my monster along an alley [коридор]
with ten storey-high walls. {57}

## It happened before.

"We stand aside," continued the creature while I was getting back into
the stream. "We do not change and do not suffer. But we feel ..." it
said a short word that meant bittersweet sadness and curiosity and
that fleeting feeling that sometimes comes on a July night when you
look at the sunset [зарю]. I wanted very much to remember that
word or at least the language it belongs to. But I forgot.

"When a chestnut filly with white mark is born in Trollaskagi valleys
we feel hope. We know that there is a chance. Roughly once in a
century the impossible happens. Somewhere in that bundle of horse
genes that encodes the chestnut color and the white mark the gene
appears that no living creature on Earth should have." {58}

"The horses born with this gene can see, hear, and smell us without
being called. That's why we break the rules. We come to them. This is
unforgivable risk. This is an invasion into lives of those who is
changing and suffering. But we cannot stop. The... drives us," the
creature repeated that beautiful word that I forgot. We want too much
to know how we look when somebody sees us.

There were three of us that evening. We came at the sunset when the
herd was already quiet and getting ready for the night. The tiny horse
who didn't know that people called her Freya laid down on the grass
next to her mother. {59}

We came very close. We were ready to wait. First the foal did not
distinguish us from the rest of the world. We were just another bunch
of dark blots, another chain of formless sounds, another smell among
thousands of smells in the spring valley.

But we didn't wait long. The sky was still glowing above the glacier
when we realized that our hope was not vane. The eyes of the newborn
paused when she was looking at us. Her ears moved when we talked to
each other. Her nostrils were pointing in our direction again and
again [пытливо] pulling in the air. {60}

We stood by the chestnut foal with the white mark all night. We
watched like the mother-horse was caressing with her warm nose and
feeding with warm milk the most seeing creature on Earth. We couldn't
yet look at ourselves with Freya's eyes on that night. We were going
to return, to learn and to wait again, but now, after the horse was
born the waiting won't be long. Just two-three earth years, short and
unreal [призрачных], like childhood that has ended.

It happened before. Seven times a seeing horse was born by Skagafjord.
Seven times we learned to look at ourselves with her eyes. Seven times
we carelessly broke the rules and got away with it. [Наша
осторожность притупилась.] We began to forget
that nobody can learn anything and do not change. And those who
changes will once have to suffer. {61}

## We know that story.

"But I don't understand," I objected. "Don't the hidden folk... Don't
you see each other?"

"Look at your hands," answered my burden. "Do you see the red spots
around the knuckles? Thin branches of veins - do you see them? And
their movements - look how smooth they are. And the skin is smooth and
even."

"Yes, I see them," I also noticed that there is also a torn scratch
with drying blood on the left ring finger. {62}

"This is a story."

"A story?"

"To see the world is to tell it. Colors, movements, individual objects
with sharp edges - they all are words. All you senses are words with
which your brain tells you the reality. Remember how you deal with
real life in your books? You yank out neat plots out of the plot-less
chaos. You omit millions of details. You never write about things you
don't know how to describe."

"But my words are random. I could have written with other words:
Chinese, Arabic." {63}

"Your senses are random just as well. You could have seen magnetic
field. Heard the contours of objects. Felt their weight without
touching. Even here on the single tiny Earth living creatures tell the
world in different ways. Each creature has its own words. Its own
plots. It's own millions omitted details. "

"Then you do not tell,.." I realized. "You,..." for few seconds I was
looking for the right verb. "You perceive the reality directly? Whole?
Without... simplifications and
[промежуточных-intermediate] artificial symbols? With
all-all the details? But... How is possible at all?" {64}

I remember that I was overwhelmed by indignation
[возмущение]. Maybe I felt that the creature lies to me.

"Then how do you feel your,.." I said that beautiful word that I
cannot remember now, "if your reality does not have a storyline? If
your world just is - and that's all. Any feelings are part of...
Feelings are not even possible if you yank them out of the story!
Feelings can happen only within the story. In the story about beings
that are born and die and in between desire the impossible." {65}

"Yes," agreed my burden in unexpectedly low voice. "We know this story
very well. But once upon a time we invented another one."

"How could you invent another one? Which one?"

The creature didn't answer.

"Now you know everything you need to know about the hidden folk," it
said. "There will be no more questions and answers. Otherwise I won't
have time to tell you Freya's story." {66}

## Visible patch of the sky ________

"Katla, the daughter of the herd owner gave her word that she will
never abandon [бросит] Freya. She kept her word for four long
years, infinitely long time for a star-loving teenager.

Even before the first winter she became very attached to the clumsy
[нескладной] filly. And when the Earth completed its turn
around the Sun and the spring came again she couldn't decide any more
whom she loves more - funny [смешная] little Freya or the
handsome grey [серебряный, check for the right color word]
colt Mauni that carried her around since she was twelve. {67}

Katla loved all horses belonging to her family, even the most
obstinate and unfriendly. She understood them and it's impossible not
to love, at least a bit for someone who understands. She understood
Freya too, understood better than any other human on Earth. There was
something strange and unusual about the little chestnut horse and
Katla kept feeling restless curiosity that often makes big love out of
small one.

They saw each other on weekends when Katla didn't have school or work
in the town. In the Trollaskagi valleys by the Skagafjord horses are
born and live free under the broad sky. Sometimes they go tens of
miles away from their winter stables. Katla saddled good-hearted Mauni
right after breakfast to reach the herd by noon.{68}

She took with her sandwiches with sheep cheese and two-liter thermos
of coffee. To while away the time on the road she listened to the
music that teenagers in developed Western countries listen to or to
the audio books about space read by velvety American voices. She knew
she could rely on Mauni. He was able to find the herd in any valley
and in any weather. Katla could just look at the line where the sky
meets the earth and sing along with the songs ringing in her
headphones or to repeat after the book readers the most important, the
most beautiful words as if they were magic spells that can change
future: {69}

"Ecliptic" "Gravitation" "Red shift" "Virgo Supercluster" "Universe"

Sooner or later Mauni began to snort joyfully and lengthened his step
[ускорял шаг]. Past another turn of the valley Katla could
recognize little horses of different colors at the distance. Some of
them ran around colliding and running away again. Those were young
colts playing, drunk with youth and freedom. Other horses didn't move.
Those were grown up mares grazing. Little horses that kept close to
them were the foals that didn't learn yet to live without their
mothers. {70}

Katla noticed Freya in a couple of minutes.

Freya didn't look too strange while she still followed
[держалась, synonyms?] her mother. She was a bit nicer
[ласковей], a bit more responsive and smarter than many
others. But Katla knew such horses before. She tried but couldn't
explain to herself why this clumsy foal is one of a kind.

Later when Freya left her mother the difference became more
noticeable. She frequently stood alone, away from other horses of the
similar age. Sometimes she looked lost, even abandoned, but Katla
quickly realized how deceptive that impression was. {71}

Once in August of the third year of Freya's life Katla departed for
her ride in late afternoon instead of usual morning. She took her
father's old hiking backpack instead of her small one. She stuffed it
with warm clothes and packed her telescope in them. Then she attached
a bag with a tent to Mauni's saddle. She made twice more sandwiches
and coffee and packed three tubs of skir. She said to her parents that
she will stay in the mountains overnight. She hoped that it will be
easier to catch at least a couple of hours of clear skies there.
Skagafjord was covered by grey clouds for the last two weeks. {72}

Mauni found the herd half an hour before the sunset. The sun did break
through the grey cloud cover in Trollaskagi mountains. As usual, Mauni
began to speed up, to snort, and to shake his mane in anticipation,
looking forward to meeting his friends. Descent to the new valley
began just behind a jagged rock in front of them. But after he moved
past it and Katla was able to see a black and red scattering of horses
way down there she ordered him to stop.{73}

She dismounted and pulled the telescope out of the backpack. Then she
fixed it on the tripod and pointed it down into the valley.

It wasn't hard to find Freya. Chestnut filly with a white mark stood
about sixty feet away from the closest horse. She was on the left
flank of the herd close to the shore of a brook that was crossing the
valley. The sun was setting behind a mountain and its shadow was
approaching the brook from the other side.

Katla adjusted the focus and looked more closely. She couldn't believe
her eyes. {74}

Freya was not alone. Well, she was alone because Katla did not see any
living creature larger than a bug in the yellow grass next to Freya.
But she was definitely looking at someone, she was responding to
somebody's voice, she was shaking her head in a friendly manner and
stretching her neck towards somebody's hands. She was having a
conversation with somebody in the way she could, in a horse way,
without words, with eyes and movements of her ears barely visible in
her shaggy mane. She was definitely talking to somebody, Katla was
sure of it. Freya's behavior was exactly the same when she met Katla.
{75}

For ten minutes while the mountain shadow was crossing the brook Katla
couldn't pull herself away from the eyepiece. A feeling she did not
know before overwhelmed her: the awe of somebody else's mystery,
helpless admiration and pointless jealousy were all mixed together,
unbearably precious, turning her mind inside out [sentence
structure?]. For the first time in her life the abyss separating all
living beings in the Universe flashed wide open in front of her. For
the first time in her life Katla felt that her world, her only
precious world spans billions of light years, stretches into past and
future for thousands of centuries but stops helplessly at the edge of
somebody else's consciousness. She was Katla, Freya was Freya, Mauni
was Mauni, every living creature under every sky was itself only and
nobody else. Every living creature was beating desperately against the
walls of its own endless world, every creature was looking eagerly
into the eyepiece of its own telescope standing at the edge of its own
abyss and nobody under any sky could help it. {76}

The mountain shadow crossed the brook and touched Freya. Suddenly
Katla realized that she was crying. She jerked her head away from the
telescope. She did not want to smudge the eyepiece lens with her salty
tears.

"OK, Mauni, OK, my dear. Let's go. Sorry I made you waiting."

After they reached the valley Katla unsaddled Mauni and told him that
he is free till next morning. She pitched the tent on the brook's
shore. Hurriedly munched away a sandwich. Washed it down with cold
water. {77}

Katla stood by the brook until the twilight thickened into full
darkness of the late summer and Freya was with her: gentle, funny, the
only one. Katla hugged her, played with the shaggy mane, caressed the
white mark on the lovely face. She was telling Freya about things that
happened in the town and in the world since the last time they've seen
each other.

After dark Katla took her backpack and climbed a hundred meters up
along the nearby slope. She found a convenient ledge and set up the
telescope. She put on all the warm clothes into which it was packed.
She turned on the camera, pulled out her phone and checked her
coordinates and the visible patch of the sky. Then she opened the web
page she used to write down her observations. {78}

She was looking at the sky till 2 am when clouds moved in from
Akyureyri direction. The piece of the Universe above her head was cozy
and homey. The flashes of doomed Perseids, reliable Vega whose light
trudged to her telescope for 25 years, and the whole Milky Way
spanning thirty thousand parsecs, all of them felt much closer to
Katla on that night than the closest living beings in her life. Closer
than mother and father. Closer than Iris, her best school friend.
Infinitely closer than the little chestnut horse called Freya. {79}

## You understand everything.

The horses born by Skagafjord are not ridden till they are four years
old. They are rarely afraid of people, one can approach them, can pet
their mane politely. This friendliness can be deceiving though. Woe to
a silly tourist who would attempt to ride a young, untamed horse in
Trollaskagi valleys.

Katla did not want Freya to be ridden. When Gisli, the local horse
trainer came and her mother began to list the young horses to be
trained that year Katla interrupted her. {80}

"Father says that nobody will buy her anyway," she said. "She is 4
feet tall, she staggers [копыта заплетаются], and her
belly is flabby. Why should Gisli waste his time on her? Why harass
her for nothing? Just let her be."

Mother smiled and shook her head.

"You father does not understand anything about the market these days.
Our Ingvar is like that proverbial general," explained she to Gisli."
He keeps preparing to the past war. He still thinks that we only train
the Landsmót champions. But half of our buyers are European girls
with exhausted [?] parents. They cannot tell trot from tölt. They
don't care about flabby belly. All they want is her to be cute and
little. And with shaggy mane. They'll see Freya and faint in
admiration [умиления]: "Oooh, she's sooo cute! Soooo cute!
Mommy, Daddy, I want one like this!" {81}

Gisli laughed politely and joylessly. He was an old school horse
trainer. When he began working with a new horse he always imagined
that it will be a new Landsmót champion. Big crowds, lots of sun and
flags all around, the best horses of Iceland, and suddenly such a
beauty comes out that everybody gasps. "Who trained such a horse?"
"Gisli Bjornsson, of course, who else?"

Katla lost her speech for few seconds.

"To sell Freya to God knows whom?!" exhaled she finally. "To some
spoiled Swedish brat? Mom, what are you talking about? She is my
horse!" {82}

Mother stopped smiling.

"And you are going to take her with you in August when you are going
to the school in Reykjavik. Will you stuff her into you bag, together
with the telescope? It looks we don't need to go as far as Sweden for
spoiled brats."

Katla glanced at her mom with teenager's [юношеской] fury but
didn't answer. She ran out of arguments. She knew that the mother was
right.

"Please, be a grown up person," said the mother touching her elbow
lightly. "You understand everything. You cannot earn money for your
Berkeley by giving riding lessons. To pay such money we have to sell
horses." {83}

"I'll get a scholarship," muttered Katla more out of habit than for
the sake of argument. "In three years I'll get a scholarship."

"You will get it for sure," the mother squeezed her elbow peacefully.
"You are a very smart girl. Gisli you should see the books she reads.
Even most of the titles are beyond my understanding." {84}

Gisly chuckled politely but sourly. He also liked smart books. He was
studying them whole winters. Thirty years ago he dreamed of going to a
school in New York. But his parents did not own herds of horses. They
did not even have a house. His father was a fisherman in
Seidisfjordur, his mother was sorting fish in Dalvik.

"Four feet is not the end of the world," said Gisli. "I remember
Freya. She is a solid horse. I'll work with her for a while and she
will be good either for Landsmót or for Sweden." {85}

## Huge dwarfs kept growing._________

At the end of the summer when the northern wind was already lashing
everything with cold rains Katla left for Reykyavik.

Before her departure she came to say goodbye to Freya.

Gisli did a good job. Katla herself never rode Freya, but Andri, her
cousin, explored the whole surrounding area on Freya's back and
constantly nervous aunt Tinna was never afraid for her son because
Freya carried around the nine years old boy in a bulky helmet very
carefully. {86}

Of course, movements of the chestnut shortie were far from elegant.
Any connoisseur of horse gaits would say that she staggers instead of
walking and any Gisli's attempts to correct this during the next,
fifth summer are doomed. Gisli understood it himself when he didn't
feel cocky [хорохорился, was not showing off].

With the owner's approval he was training Freya for patient work with
children, not for races that she would never win anyway.

When Katla came to say goodbye Freya was standing by the wooden fence
around the spacious corral for the horses that lived on the Earth
their fourth or fifth summer. It was late. Gisli already went home and
took with him restless Andri to pass him to aunt Tinna from hand to
hand. {87}

Freya's peers crowded together at the far end of the corral. There a
group of tourists were waving around their phones. The tourists drove
in on two gas-guzzling offroaders along the dirt spur of the Ring
road. Katla's parents built the spur for the potential buyers, but the
phone waving company obviously was not going to buy anything. They
stopped to chatter and gawk and take selfies in front of the cute
horses and a waterfall that was flowing from the rock behind the
corral.

Katla dismounted, crouched under the fence to get through and walked
to Freya. She stroke the white mark on her attentive face. {88}

"I am leaving tomorrow," she said. "for long time."

Freya moved her ears.

"I will be studying," said Katla "to better look at the stars."

Freys sniffed the sleeve of her wind jacket and nuzzled her elbow.

"I want to know how everything started," said Katla "and how
everything will end. There are hints up there. I will learn how to
find them." {89}

Freya snorted quietly, stepped from foot to foot. She looked back as
if checking that the rock and the waterfall were still there. Then she
bent her neck and seemingly nudged Katla to the side.

"What?" Katla didn't understand.

Freya turned around and slowly walked toward the waterfall. Katla ran
after her.

They crossed the corral together and stopped at the fence. Now the
water column roared and smoked within just thirty feet from them.
Katla winced - her face tingled under the fine icy spray. {90}

There was a rocky stretch few steps wide between the fence and the
shore of the brook that started by the waterfall. There were few
clumps of grass struggling to grow there, a piece of rope, an empty
cigarette pack. Nothing else was there, or rather Katla could see
nothing else there but Freya kept staring in the direction of
scattered grass blades and shreds of moss among the wet rocks.

What's there?" asked Katla loudly over the water noise. For a few
seconds she completely forgot that she talks to a horse. "What do you
see?" {91}

She felt uneasy at first and then she felt dizzying horror as if she
was looking at the stars from cozy distance through the safe telescope
lenses but suddenly everything went topsy-turvy and stars now were
beneath her, the sky turned into an abyss and the telescope fell into
that abyss together with the tripod, the camera, and the computer and
she followed them a couple of seconds later. The sharp accurate dots
that humans haughtily call colored dwarfs began to swell turning into
hairy thermonuclear monsters that were unbearable to look at. But she
kept looking because her eyelids did not close anymore. There were no
eyelids, no eyes even, all that was left was horrifying non-human
vision that was doomed to see all the electromagnetic waves, decay of
every radioactive nuclei, every gravitational fold in space, quantum
birth of every new infinite universe. {92}

"What do you see?" whispered Katla again.

She kept falling, huge dwarfs kept growing and among them she saw a
dim pea: a smaller monster, ageing white dwarf next to a flabby red
giant. The dwarf greedily sucked matter out of its neighbor and kept
getting heavier and heavier approaching Chandrasekar limit and a
second before it happened Katla realized what is going to happen: the
dwarf will explode with a flash brighter that five billions of Suns
and its remains will fly in every direction: carbon that once will
make her body and oxygen that body will breath. When the explosion
started and the shine of the supernova flooded half of the abyss Katla
saw that the explosion was not the only one. As long as her non-human
vision could see, and it could see through infinity, supernovas were
exploding everywhere and after billions of years or in the same moment
the summer was getting to an end everywhere in the Northern hemisphere
of the third planet circling around the G2V-type star and at the end
of that summer at the fault between two tectonic plates on a basalt
island next to water falling from a rock everywhere two creature
stood: a horse and a human and next to them behind the fence stood
somebody else. {93}

Katla did not see it but she knew that it is not a living being
because it could not die. But it could look and it looked right at
her. It looked at Katla in every of her countless universes and saw
all of her, from the first glimpses of consciousness to her demise
under onslaught of Altzheimer... no, after car wreck in Santyago...no,
after cancer pain and long-awaited injection in a Swiss clinic..,
after a short fight with a new flu strain.., after wild horror in a
falling airplane, after thousands of different scenarios with the same
ending.

"Are you OK?" she heard when she stopped screaming for a second to
draw in breath for another scream. {94}

"Are you OK? Why are you screaming? Are you OK? Can we help you?"

Katla turned her head. A girl of her age stood panting next to her:
tall and bulky, wearing a woolen sweater from a gift store, with broad
freckled face. She reached her first. Her friends were running after
her: tall teenager boy, grey-haired man with a stick in his hand,
slender woman holding a first-aid kit. There were three more people
behind her but they were far away in the middle of the corral and
Katla did see the details.

"Yes, yes, I'm OK," she said turning to Freya. {95}

Freya kept looking at the rocky stretch between the fence and the
waterfall. Here ears were moving attentively. Where she was looking
there were rocks, air, water spray, a piece of rope and a faded
cigarette pack.

Katla stroke the chestnut back one last time. Then turned to the
approaching tourists.

"I'm OK," she repeated not looking into their faces. 'I'm sorry. Thank
you."

Suddenly she ran around the tourists and toward Mauni waiting on the
other side of the corral. {96}

"I'm sorry!" she shouted again while running, not turning her head.
"I'm sorry! I have to go!"

She had to go home, finish packing, and catch at least a couple of
hours of sleep. She and her mother planned to leave for Reykjavik
before 7am. {97}

## She knew she will not come back.

Katla stayed in Reykjavik only for one year.

In that year she fell in love with a man for the first time in her
life and mastered the areas of mathematics needed to read the hints
scattered in the sky. She learned to wake up and live with the thing
that people sloppily call "broken heart". She learned to understand
the equations that tell things beyond words and imagination about the
universe. She learned to tolerate short days between minutes of
happiness. {98}

Few times she went home, to the sleepy town by the Trollaskagi valleys
on Skagafjord shore. She spent whole week there during Christmas
holidays. She stayed in her room on the second floor surrounded by
textbooks and working on her computer.

The winter stables could be seen from the window in her room if she
stood just next to the wall. Katla knew that Freya was waiting for her
fifth spring in one of them. It would have been very easy: go
downstairs, put on a jacket, slide her feet into somebody's boots and
walk five minutes in freezing cold. Every time when she pulled herself
away from math to have a bite or visit a bathroom Katla was making up
her mind to visit Freya. And every time her determination evaporated
on the last steps of the stairs leading to the first floor. {99}

Next year Katla worked whole summer as a guide of the horse back tours
in Reykjavik suburbs. She knew already that she will not return to the
Reykjavik University in the fall. She knew that at the end of the
summer she will go to Aarhus city on the westernmost shore of the
Baltic Sea. There, in one of the best universities of Europe people
who want to look at the stars and get paid for it can get good
education. Besides, the home country of the man that happened to teach
her how to wake up and live despite anything was much closer from
there.

On the noon of the last Saturday of August when Katla's plane to
Denmark took off from Keflavik Freya was bought by a Swedish family.
{100}

## I felt a click inside.

Katla's mother greeted the buyers. The father did not like to deal
with the clients and anyway he was in Reykjavik seeing Katla away
[провожал].

The Swedes came just after nine. They said that they stay in a guest
house with hot pools nearby on the fjord shore. Grownups were called
Anna and Sverker. Despite youthful and sporty looks they definitely
were older than fifty. A blond ten years old girl came with them. She
called them mommy and daddy and kept explaining things to them in
condescending tone. Her name was Mariel.{101}

"Late spoiled child," thought Katla's mother.

She invited the guests inside, made coffee for grownups and poured
lemonade for the girl.

Anna did most of the talking. Sverker mostly nodded in approval with
occasional cheerful "Yes" or "Sure". Mariel listened very closely but
did not speak herself. She was too shy to talk to a stranger in
English. {102}

According to Anna their trip to Iceland began the last spring, in a
supermarket. Sverker and Mariel were buying groceries for the week.
Sverker was pushing the cart and the girl walked in front of him with
the groceries list in her hands. She picked things from the shelves,
put them into the cart and diligently folded over the list items until
the list turned into one thick strip of paper.

The last item had number 23 and it was in the candy isle. There, on
the shelf with chocolate (organic and fair trade) was a colorful book
called "Even elves love Nyorvi." Apparently some child picked it up in
the book section and then either traded it for candy or just dropped
it here. {103}

A horse with a shaggy mane drawn by a good illustrator was looking at
the reader from the front cover. Far behind the horse, under the first
word of the title was a smoking volcano top. The text on the back
cover promised fascinating, exciting, extraordinary adventures of
Johanna and her best friend, the Icelandic horse Nyorvi in the land of
sheep and volcanoes that is not as desolate as it may seem at the
first glance. {104}

Mariel stopped in doubt. Half of her peers learned to read by the
endless series of books about Sigge, the irresistibly handsome
Shetland pony with whom nothing special ever happened, but
nevertheless everybody wanted to know what is going to happen next.
Everybody but Mariel. She did not care for horse stories. In a book
store she did not even look at the shelf with the shiny manes and
tails and golden hair of children from the developed countries of the
Northern hemisphere. She preferred books about young detectives and
haunted houses. {105}

At the same time Mariel had no doubts that the book with a horse in
front of a volcano happened to be found in the candy isle for a
reason. The book clearly was waiting for her. It was laying right on
top of the item 23 from the groceries list. Mariel explained to ther
father that such things don't happen by sheer chance. And if elves
love the horse called Nyorvi then the book is not only about horses.
It's about elves and other supernatural creatures living in Iceland.
Not too different from haunted houses.

In short, Mariel put the book into the cart. At home she started
reading right away while crunching product number 23. Soon after ten,
when Anna came to persuade her to get ready for bed Mariel already had
a new big dream. {106}

Most of all, of course, she wanted to get into the book. To be Johanna
from the first page to the last. Summer vacation began on the first
page and parents sent Johanna to Iceland, to her slightly weird
Icelandic grandfather. One day the grandfather took her for a
mysterious walk and strictly ordered her to follow his steps. Johanna,
of course, did not follow his steps and got instantly lost. In the end
only her new fervent and dedicated friend Nyorvi whom she met by
chance in a mountain valley saved her from cunning elves and
quick-tempered trolls. Elves and trolls were trying to put a spell on
her snickers and switch her memories to prevent her from finding the
way back to the grandfather's house. Few times the brave Nyorvi
carried Johanna away from right in front of them. {107}

But Mariel understood that the only way to be Johanna from the book is
to imagine it in her head and even that works only when she shuts the
door in her room and closes the eyes. She already read forty nine
books (not counting the textbooks) and some of them she read three
times and one book even seven times. She understood the difference
between reality and fiction.

So her new big dream was more realistic. Mariel just wanted to go to
Iceland and find a real friend with a shaggy mane. {108}

She imagined how she would remember meeting him in the far future, in
a year or two. For example if a new girl would come to their class and
ask about her Icelandic horse. "How did you pick him?" the new girl
would ask. "There are so many horses in Iceland and perhaps all of
them are very handsome." "I did not pick him," Mariel would say. One
does not pick real friends. We just looked at each other and I felt a
click inside. As if a lock in my heart opened. I realized: That if
HIM! And it seems like he realized it too.

Similarly, ageing adults sometimes imagine a forgotten meeting with
the person who once taught them to wake up and live despite anything.
This is how the author of the book found on the shelf with chocolates
described meeting of Johanna and Nyorvi. {109}

"I understand" said Katla's mother at that moment. "Do you want to see
the horses?"

She could not listen to that any more. She always despised cheap
sentimentality. "They feed this nonsense even to kids," she thought
grumpily trying to distract her own conscience. "I'm glad I did not
buy books like that for Katla."

When the Swedes finished their coffee she escorted them to the corral
where Katla was saying goodbye to Freya a year ago. After an hour of
questions and thrashing [?] around the blond girl picked out a funny
chestnut mare with a white mark on the muzzle. The mare was standing
by the waterfall, apart from her herd mates as if being shy of them,
but she welcomed the new people like they were long-awaited guests.
She even lowered her head so that Mariel could hug her neck. {110}

"Good girl, Freya!" whispered Katla's mother while the little Swede
was stroking the chestnut mane imagining that click in her childish
heart. "Good girl!"

She often felt ashamed when selling horses to Europeans. Katla's
mother knew very well that nothing good awaits them: terrible days on
the way to the new place, god knows what owners, insatiable clouds of
gnats and an itching torture called "eczema". On that noon, on the
last Saturday of August the shame took hold of her stronger than
usual. She was very close to breaking the deal and showing the Swedes
and their dreamy spoiled daughter out. {111}

As usual, the thought about money stopped her. About money for Katla,
to be precise. She believed in Katla. She believed that sooner or
later she will see her name in the news next to big discoveries that
are hard to wrap you head around even in popular science form. But
there was still studying to do before the discoveries. And Swedes did
not bargain. They agreed right away to pay twelve hundred euros for
the clumsy shortie with a white mark. {112}

## Sed lex dura lex.

Horse transporting planes do not fly to Europe half-empty.
Transportation companies wait till the flight is full. Usually they
don't have to wait long. Every year thousands of young mares and
stallions that grew under the open sky leave Iceland to never return.

This is the law, merciless and right. There is lot of other horses
where the planes are going [?]. They carry diseases unknown in
Iceland. If a horse comes back it could bring such a disease. {113}

The most careful people say that if it happens then the story of both
Americas will repeat itself. They remind how people crossed the
Atlantic in wooden ships five centuries ago. Invisible parasites that
secretly arrived with them infected new unprotected bodies. In these
bodies they spread to the north and south and killed ninety percent of
the local population in a few years.

If we cancel the strict law, say the careful people, death will come
everywhere: from Borgarnes to Hornafjord and Vattnajokuddl foothills.
From Vik to Skagafjord and Trollaskagi [verify toponims]. Only this
time funny horses with shaggy manes will be dying, not people. {114}

Skeptics laugh at the careful people. "Fear sees danger everywhere,"
they say. "The law," they say "is good for business: to keep the breed
clean and charge foreigners high prices. "Don't you tell us," the
skeptics say "tearful stories about dying foals."

But skeptics are also secretly afraid of the overseas microbes. And
the law remains the law. {115}

When an Icelandic horse is sold to Europe, especially if she's sold
through Internet, she has no vaccinations yet against the overseas
diseases. Sometimes she is not even shod. She still thinks that the
world should be endless and full of smell of grass, it should murmur
with snow-melt water in a brook and shake from the hooves of young
colts playing with each other.

Now, after the sale everything changes. She will be driven into a van
and then into an airplane and it will turn out that the world can
stink of iron and gasoline. The world will be rattling and screaming,
shaking and reeling and then roaring the terrible roar as if in pain
and keep falling down. It will be falling only four human hours, but
the horse does not know about this human time built out of artificial
pieces. In her head the world will be falling forever, until it falls
to the ground. {116}

It will finally fall to the solid ground and calm down for a little
while.

She will be driven out of the plane. New people making new sounds will
show up. They will look and grope over her, and sting her with a metal
stinger, and drive her into a van again. The world will be shaking and
rattling again for few more human hours. When this terrible eternity
will be over she will be driven out of the van and put into a stable.

Everything that happened before the world was falling and could not
fall will vanish. Her life will start from a new faded page and it
will be life of a completely different horse. Every day this new horse
will have to wear either a bridle or a halter. Her hooves will be shod
with pieces of iron. She will be taught tricks and absolute obedience.

She will be sold to yet another people when her owner grows up to a
bigger horse or just get tired of her. Then she will be sold again and
again. Ever new boys and girls will be riding her, she will have to
get along with the new stable neighbors and every summer till the end
of this second and the last life she will be tortured by bad allergy
to mosquito bites. Mosquitoes that were not and could not be in her
erased past life by Skagafjord, in Trollaskagi valleys. {118}

## She listened to the Schroedinger kitten

Three years later on her way from Aarchus to Berkly Katla made a
month-long stop in Iceland. She wanted to try to think about nothing
and do nothing. Nobody explained to her that this July will be one of
the best in her life but she had a hunch about it and that hunch
itself was big part of the joy. {119}

The joy was a special one: weightless, scattered in the shiny air like
dust motes in a childhood memory about a sunny day. This happens only
to those who passed a lot of tests well and are going to keep studying
in a new place with new people and know for sure that this is the
right and the only choice. But at this moment between the achieved and
set goals there are few days of aimless youth filled with friends and
there is already enough experience to reflect on it but not enough to
be afraid that it happens only once. {120}

Katla spent the first fiends with her friends in Reykjavik. She was
getting up when breakfast hours in the cafe on Leigavegur was almost
over. And every day turning into a night she was doing what smart
young people with good health and money saved for summer vacation do
in Reykjavik.

From Reykjavik she went to see her parents. {121}

Nothing changed there. Mother and father busied themselves on the farm
and sold horses. The town was asleep, the tourists ate dinner in the
food court of the museum that was built for tourists. Even Iris, the
best school friend was there. Ahe studied three years in Akureyri,
worked for a year in Egilsstadir and returned home as soon as she
found a vacant position in the museum.

"The old Sigmundur, do you remember him?" asked Iris when Ktla dropped
by in the middle of a working day. {122}

Katla remembered old Sigmundur very well. He sat in the museum gift
store since the opening of the museum, which means almost all her
life. He had grey hair, always wore a plaid shirt. Always with a grin
hidden in his beard but visible in his eyes. Of course she remembered
Sugmundur! She talked to him just year and a half ago when she came
here for Christmas. The question might have seemed silly, but she and
Iris were twenty with a small change. Katla was going from Aarchus to
Berkly, Iris was expecting her first child, half of the life passed
since the school graduation and it was clear that the question was
reasonable.{123}

"Yes, I remember him," said Katla.

"He went missing this spring, haven't you heard? It was all over the
news."

"I don't follow the news," admitted Katla.

"I don't follow them either," laughed Iris, "but everybody says
"Sigmundur is all over the news." In short, he disappeared on the last
snowfall night. He went to the lighthouse to see Bjarni in the evening
and took his voilin with him, as usual. Bjarni says it was a regular
evening, nothing strange. They played some music, drunk a bit,
chattered about things. Driving under influence was next in the plans.
I mean Sigmundur got into his car soon after midnight and drove home
along the usual completely familiar road. Just over two miles."{124}

"Did he crash?!" gasped Katla. "On that turn above the steep slope by
the brook?"

"No," Iris shook her head. "He did not crash. Not in the car in any
case. I told you: he disappeared. They found the car right away next
morning. Yes, it was close to that turn, on the shoulder. The violin
was on the passenger seat, driver's door was cracked open. Gas tank
was empty because he did not kill the engine when leaving the
car. Initially everybody thought that it's obvious: he stopped to take
a leak, stood over the cliff, stumbled and fell down. It happens. But
later they searched the whole brook downstream from that place and did
not find anything. No body."{125}

"What about the traces? Weren't there any traces left? "

"It was snowing wet all night. It all melted down by noon. They
brought a dog but it just ran around the car and barked few times, and
that was it.

"What about the case investigation? It's still going on, isn't it?"

Probably," Iris shrugged. "I don't know much. Ask your parents, they
probably know more. But why I mentioned him at the first place. It's
really sad that Sigmundur is missing he was a good old man, but I got
his place just in time."

She smiled and stroke her rounded belly under a baggy old-fashioned
dress that she wore for work because historical ambience made the
tourists happy.{126}

"For how long did you come here?" asked Katla.

Her cheerful voice din not allow any other answer but "No way I'll
stay here for long."

"I'm not sure," Iris said slowly. "We'll see. Honestly, I wanted to
come home. Well, first of all I wanted to get away from the future
father." she stroke her belly again. But it's nice to come home too.
You know, I realized that I'm not you when I was still studying in
Akureyri. I was telling somebody, some German student there about you,
saying how cool you are and stopped in mid-sentence. I sat with my
mouth still open and thought: but I'm not Katla. Katla left for the
biggest telescopes in the world and what about me? I am going after
Katla. Why in the world am I going after Katla. I don't need
telescopes." Iris curled her fingers, made a telescope out of her
hands and looked through it with one eye while closing the other. "I
have everything I need," she continued observing Katla through her
telescope while sitting on the stool next to the cash register.
"Paints, paper, computer. I'll get a better camera soon. Why should I
leave? I can do my drawing here just as well."{127}

Iris dropped her telescope, put her hands down and opened the closed
eye.

Katla drew in the breath for reply. She felt a lot of things at
once: pity, despair, anger, hurt, contempt. All theese annoyingly
familiar emotions wispered the same words to her: "But if you will
stay here you never know what you could have drawn somewhere else."

Katla almost said that and almost added "You are deceiving yourself.
you are lulling yourself to stay." [?] {128}

But the Shroedinger cat did not let her. Actually first she remembered
the simplest form of the Schroedinger equation. Then an old wave
function problem came to mind, the one she spent half a day trying to
solve back in Reykjavik or maybe even at home on that Christmas when she could
not make up her mind to visit Freya. That made her feel shame. To drown
the shame she grabbed on the next association: picture of a kitten in
superposition: dead and alive at the same time. A guy who had a crash
on her in Aarchus once hung such a picture on her wall meaning "Here I
am, neither dead nor alive, waiting for your word."

Of course there were two kitten pictures: one sitting and smiling, the
other laying belly up. They were just overlaid in
a crude and sloppy way. Iris could have drawn them much better. {129}
